Athens, historic city and capital of Greece. Many of Classical civilization’s intellectual and artistic ideas originated there, and the city is generally considered to be the birthplace of Western civilization.

Athens lies 5 miles (8 km) from the Bay of Phaleron, an inlet of the Aegean (Aigaíon) Sea where Piraeus (Piraiévs), the port of Athens, is situated, in a mountain-girt arid basin divided north-south by a line of hills. Greater Athens has an area of 165 square miles (427 square km). The Kifisós River, only a trickle in summer, flows through the western half; the Ilisós River, often dry, traverses the eastern half. The surrounding mountains—Párnis, 4,636 feet (1,413 metres); Pentelicus (Pendéli), 3,631 feet; Hymettos (Imittós), 3,365 feet; and Aigáleon, 1,535 feet—add to the impression of barrenness. Yet such considerations are superficial when compared with the fecundity of Athens’s bequests to the world, such as its philosophy, its architecture, its literature, and its political ideals.

Character of the city of Athens: Athens, with its tall buildings and contemporary shops, is the first European city when approached from the Middle East. When approached from the west, from elsewhere in Europe, what strikes the visitor is the influence of the East—in the food, music, and clamorous street life—perhaps vestiges of a time when Athens was divorced from European society under the yoke of Ottoman rule. Nevertheless, it is wrong to say that Athens is a mixture of East and West: it is Greek and, more particularly, Athenian. The city, after all, nurtured Western civilization thousands of years ago. Athens remains on the world stage to this day.

Character of the city of Athens: Notably, in 2004 the world came to the city for the Olympic Games, which spurred a dramatic makeover for Athens. In addition to building a raft of new sports venues and facilities (including a stadium designed by Santiago Calatrava), Athens undertook massive transportation infrastructure improvements that included dramatic expansion of public transportation and the construction of a new international airport.

Character of the city of Athens: Some three centuries after the death of Pericles (429 bce), Athenians entered upon a period of bondage that lasted almost 2,000 years. The city was freed in 1833, and in the following 170 years it was the scene of more than a dozen revolutions, another brutal foreign occupation, and a civil war of especial savagery. This long history of passion and suffering has had considerable effect on the Athenian character. The core of that character is an implacable will to survive, buttressed by a profound sense of loyalty (especially to the family) and patriotism. The Greek Orthodox Church, which is directed by a synod sitting in Athens, was a main force in keeping alive the Greek language, tradition, and literature when such things were forbidden, and most people still support it.

Character of the city of Athens: The millennia of oppression, instead of driving the Athenians into obtuse moroseness, have honed their wit and rendered them tough but supple, while centuries of privation have only preserved their warmth and generosity. The long oral tradition, alive even under the invader, has reflected and stimulated a taste for rich talk. Of course, the poetic impulse to make a good story better leads to considerable exaggeration in daily conversation, suiting a vanity that goes with a sharp-edged sense of personal and family honour and the spoiling of children. The ancient heroes, too, were vain about both themselves and honour, boasting as much about outwitting the enemy as about outfighting him.

Climate of Athens: The climate of Athens is benign: frost is rare (the minimum temperature is 32 °F, or 0 °C) and snow seldom lies, while the summers, though hot (maximum temperature is 99 °F, or 37 °C), are dry, and a fresh northeasterly wind often blows by day. The nights are cool. The climate of the city permits outdoor activity the year round and has had an important effect on both the style of architecture and the life and political institutions of the city.

The city plan of Athens: In 1833 there was almost no Athens at all. During the fight for independence, it had been entirely evacuated in 1827, and six years later it held perhaps 4,000 people in the straggle of little houses on the north slope below the Acropolis. The newly imported king of the Hellenes, Otto, the 18-year-old son of Louis I of Bavaria, was installed in the only two-story stone house, while his German architects hurried ahead with plans for a palace and a new Athens far out in the fields.

The city plan of Athens: Below the well-sited but very plain palace, a large garden square, Síntagma (Constitution) Square, was laid out. Today it is garnished in the tourist season with some of Europe’s most luxurious cafe chairs, and at all seasons it is hemmed in by tall new buildings and elderly luxury hotels. Broad avenues were created and are still the city centre’s principal thoroughfares (Stadíou and Panepistimíou [Elefthérios Venizélou]), between which an orderly grid of narrow side streets was laid out. The housing that developed was generally the sort of architecture familiar in Victorian London: solid, porched, rather imposing, the later imitations graceless and monotonous. In Athens it is called the Ottonian style, but there is little of it left as the centre encroaches on old residential areas.

The city plan of Athens: Once the new capital was established, the city grew at a regular rate of about 7 percent a year, soon reaching 50,000 inhabitants, a figure not much exceeded in the days of Athens’s greatest power and glory. By 1907 the municipality had a population of 167,479. Omónia (Harmony) Square had been built at the western end of the two main streets, with other broad avenues radiating from it, but it did not develop as the hoped-for balance to Síntagma.

The city plan of Athens: By then the railway to Piraeus had been built, its station near the antique Agora. Indeed, the city plan projected a logical growth southward along this axis, but a real estate developer beckoned northward—the National Archaeological Museum is out this way—and the newly rich followed. The palace garden almost touched the Arch of Hadrian and the 15 mammoth columns (some of them 7 feet 10 inches in diameter) of the temple of Olympian Zeus, last of the Classical buildings built in Athens, and beyond lay empty fields. The slopes of Mount Likavittós, outside the town limits, were still pine-clad. Since then the garden has become one of the painfully rare public parks in Athens. Likavittós now rears up in the middle of the city (as if Hyde Park or Central Park were a 1,112-foot mountain), its lower slopes built upon and many of the trees felled for a road leading to a cog railway and restaurant.

The city plan of Athens: Along Panepistimíou Street rose the Academy of Athens, in marble from Mount Pentelicus, its pediments and colonnades gilded. Its new neighbours were the University of Athens (refounded in 1837), the colonnade adorned with paintings, and the National Library. All were done in Greek Revival style by the court’s German architects. A new Royal Palace (now the Presidential Residence) was built during 1891–97, a little southeast of the old (which is now the Hellenic Parliament Building) on Herodes Atticus Street. This leads to the 70,000-seat Panathenaic (Athens) Stadium, reconstructed by an expatriate Greek millionaire in time for the revival of the Olympic Games in 1896.

The city plan of Athens: In 1921 the orderly progress of Athens was overturned and haphazard development began, for ethnic minorities were exchanged between Greece and Turkey, and approximately 1,500,000 Greeks, most of them penniless, came home from Asia Minor. Despite government efforts to resettle them elsewhere, many swarmed into shantytowns around the fringes of Athens and Piraeus, and the area’s population soared from 473,000 to 718,000. After that the city began to spread in two directions, south toward Piraeus and north toward the village of Kifisiá, which first became a smart suburb when Herodes Atticus built his villa there in the 1st century bce.

The city plan of Athens: In the 1940s hideous things happened in Athens. During the German occupation many people died from starvation, and the city began to fall apart from lack of maintenance. When the Germans left, part of the Allied-equipped resistance refused to lay down its arms, and the civil war began. For a while the government held only the Parliament building, neighbouring embassies, and a part of Síntagma Square, while the palace garden was used as a common grave.

Housing in Athens: A construction boom began in the 1950s. New apartment houses pushing up everywhere erased old social boundaries (though the Kolonáki district on the southeast slope of Likavittós remained an enclave of respectable fortunes), and villages that had been attached to the city in the previous expansion lost their physical and political identities. A network of major highways was thrown up. The west side of the historic olive grove by the Kifisós River was shorn, and hillside greenery began to disappear under housing, either unauthorized or made legal through political skulduggery. Open space vanished, without provision for parks, playgrounds, or even schools, and Athens spread down to the sea by Glifádha, joining up with Piraeus. Piraeus itself was transformed from one of the world’s celebrated honky-tonk ports into a clean, newly built, flower-decorated city.

Housing in Athens: The Athens master plan was enlarged several times to keep pace with spread, which by 1964 had already attained 75 square miles, with a built-up area of 17 square miles outside the plan altogether. Land values in the centre quadrupled, then octupled, and rose proportionately elsewhere. Traffic increased almost to the saturation point at rush hours, and the city continued to sprawl beyond its planned limits. As international tourism increased, Ellinikón Airport, south of the city, was expanded and modernized.

Housing in Athens: The city water supply from an artificial lake at Marathon was insufficient to supply the new building construction, and the Mórnos River 110 miles to the northwest was dammed and tapped. Installation of a modern sewer system was undertaken, together with controls to check the floods that roar into Athens when heavy rains pour off the denuded mountains.

The people of Athens: The population of Greater Athens increased considerably after the war of independence in the early 1830s. The rapid growth was largely attributable to the great influx of refugees from Asia Minor in the early 1920s and the migration of rural inhabitants from the provinces during World War II and the communist rebellion (1946–49). By the 1960s Athens had become a bustling cosmopolitan city. Almost all Greeks adhere to the Eastern (Greek) Orthodox faith.

The economy, Industry and trade of Athens: Since World War I Athens has become the hub of all mercantile business, export and import. With Piraeus it is the most important manufacturing city in Greece. Athens accounts for half of the jobs in industry and handicrafts, and earnings are much higher than the national average. There are cloth and cotton mills, distilleries, breweries, potteries, flour mills, soap factories, tanneries, chemical works, and carpet factories. Exports include olive oil, tomato products, wine, cement, bauxite, and textile manufactures. Publishing enterprises are important.

The economy, Industry and trade of Athens: The brilliant Attic light, however, is now dimmed by the pall of air pollution hovering over the city. To discourage new factories from further adding to the problem and to stimulate the economic growth of other regions, an industrial wage tax has been imposed in the Athens area, and tax incentives have been offered to new factories set up in other areas.

Transportation and shipping in Athens: Athens accounts for more than half of the cars, trucks, and buses in use in the country. Furthermore, the number of merchant ships registered in Greece (mostly at Piraeus, the country’s largest port) increased since the late 1960s as Greek shipowners answered the government’s call to bring their foreign-registered ships home (though many Greek ships remain under other flags). Scores of shipping offices have opened in refurbished Piraeus, while on weekends shipping magnates sail to the nearby islands of Hydra and Spetse in chrome-fitted luxury yachts flying Panamanian or Liberian flags.

Transportation and shipping in Athens: Snarled traffic and air pollution, long endemic problems for Athens, were both significantly reduced by the extensive transportation infrastructure improvements that were undertaken to prepare Athens to host the 2004 Olympic Games. A new airport, Athens International Airport—located east of central Athens between the towns of Koropi, Markopoulo, and Loutsa—was completed in 2001. Before the Games’ opening ceremony, some 17 miles (27 km) of track and 28 stations were added to the metropolitan transit system, which includes an electrified rail line, buses, and trolleys. By the 2010s the Athens Metro network was being used by about 650,000 passengers per day. Larissa, the main railway station, links the city with the rest of the country and the continent.

History of Athens, The early period, Factors inducing settlement: The site of Athens has been inhabited since the Neolithic Period (before 3000 bce). Evidence for this has come from pottery finds on and around the Acropolis but particularly from a group of about 20 shallow wells, or pits, on the northwest slope of the Acropolis, just below the Klepsydra spring. These wells contained burnished pots of excellent quality, which show that even at this remote period Athens had a settled population and high technical and artistic standards. There are similar indications of occupation in the Early and Middle Bronze ages (3000–1500 bce).

History of Athens, The early period, Factors inducing settlement: The earliest buildings date from the Late Bronze Age, particularly about 1200 bce when the Acropolis was the citadel. Around its top was built a massive wall of cyclopean masonry (a type of construction using huge blocks without mortar). The construction of this wall probably marks the union of the 12 towns of Attica (the department in which Athens lies) under the leadership of Athens, an event traditionally ascribed to Theseus. The palace of the king was in the area of the later Erechtheum, but almost no traces of it have been identified. The town, insofar as it was outside the Acropolis, lay to the south, where wells and slight remains of houses have been found. The principal cemetery lay to the northwest, and several richly furnished chamber tombs and many smaller ones have been discovered in the area that later became the Agora.

History of Athens, The early period, Factors inducing settlement: Whether through the strength of its walls, the valour of its citizens, or its geographical position away from the main route to the Peloponnesus, Athens seems to have weathered the Late Bronze and Early Iron ages, troubled times, better than other, more important centres. There is no evidence of complete or widespread destruction, as at Mycenae and Pylos. In fact, the pottery styles show an unbroken development from Sub-Mycenaean (later than Mycenaean but not yet Greek) to Proto-Geometric (the earliest phase of Geometric) and Geometric (1000 bce to about 750 bce). Furthermore, there is positive evidence that from about 1000 bce the city began to expand in a northwesterly direction, into the area that had previously been confined to cemeteries. Wells appear, indicating occupation by the living, and any graves in the area are increasingly confined to restricted plots or placed along the roads outside the town limits. The Agora and some of the public buildings seem, to judge from scattered notices in later writers, to have been located west and northwest of the Acropolis. Though there are few remains of buildings, the wealth and prosperity of the city can be appreciated from late Geometric graves found in the area of the later Dipylon and Erian gates. These graves were adorned with large vases, sometimes more than five feet high, decorated with geometric patterns and with scenes of battles, processions, and funeral ceremonies.

History of Athens, The early period, Athens’s expansion: The 6th century bce was a period of phenomenal growth, particularly during the tyranny of Peisistratus and his sons (c. 560–510 bce). On the Acropolis the old primitive shrines began to be replaced with large stone temples. About 580 bce a temple to Athena known as the Hecatompedon (Hundred-Footer) was erected on the site later to be occupied by the Parthenon. The pediments (triangular spaces forming the gable) of this temple were decorated with large-scale sculpture in gaily coloured porous limestone, representing groups of lions bringing down bulls and depicting snaky-tailed monsters in the angles. These sculptures are now displayed in the New Acropolis Museum. In 566 bce Peisistratus reorganized the Panathenaic Games in honour of Athena on a four-yearly basis. About 530 bce a large peripteral temple (one having a row of columns on all sides) to Athena Polias (Guardian of the City) was erected near the centre of the Acropolis, on the site of the old Bronze Age palace. It had marble pedimental sculpture representing the battle of the gods and giants. Besides these two major temples there were five smaller buildings, treasuries and the like, and a wealth of votive offerings in marble, bronze, and terra-cotta. The Acropolis thus became a full-fledged sanctuary.

History of Athens, The early period, Athens’s expansion: This change from citadel to sanctuary is also reflected in the arrangement of the entrance at the west. Instead of a winding path suitable for defense, there was, from about the middle of the 6th century bce, a broad ramp, designed as a ceremonial approach, leading up to the gate. This basic change of attitude toward the Acropolis must mean that the whole lower town was surrounded by a fortification wall and the Acropolis was no longer needed for defense. The ancient historians Herodotus and Thucydides tell of such a wall, but no trace of it has been found, and its course and date are uncertain.

History of Athens, The early period, Athens’s expansion: In the lower town, too, the 6th century was a period of growth and change. The old Agora, below the western approach to the Acropolis, was now inadequate, and a new one was therefore laid out in the low ground to the northwest. This was accomplished by demolishing houses and filling in wells and gullies to create a broad open square, which was used for gatherings of all sorts: political, judicial, religious, and commercial. Dramatic contests were held there, too, before the construction of a separate theatre. Various public buildings and shrines were erected around the borders of the square, including the Basileios (Royal) Stoa, where the archon Basileus, one of the chief magistrates of the city, had his headquarters; the Old Bouleuterion (or Council House); and a large enclosure (100 square feet) that probably housed the Heliaia, the largest of the popular lawcourts. At the southeast corner of the square a fountain house received water from outside the city through a conduit of terra-cotta pipes.

History of Athens, The early period, Athens’s expansion: In 480 bce this flourishing city was captured and destroyed by the Persians. The Acropolis buildings were burned and the houses in the lower town mostly destroyed, except for a few that had been spared to house the Persian leaders.

History of Athens, Athens at its zenith: When the Athenians returned, in 479 bce, they immediately rebuilt their fortification wall larger than before. About 20 years later the famous Long Walls were built, connecting the city with its port, Piraeus, four miles away. They were parallel over most of their course, forming a corridor 550 feet wide. These walls played a vital part in the history of Athens during the Classical period, for they allowed it to carry the supplies brought in by its powerful fleet in safety to the city, even when enemy forces roamed the Attic countryside.

History of Athens, Athens at its zenith: For 30 years after the Persian destruction, the Athenians built only fortifications and some secular buildings in the Agora, notably the Stoa Poikile, or Painted Colonnade, with its famous paintings by Polygnotus and Micon, one of which represented the Battle of Marathon. The Tholos, the round building that served as the headquarters of the executive committee of the council, was also built at this time. Lack of attention to the Acropolis was partly the result of the oath, sworn before the Battle of Plataea in 479 bce, that sanctuaries destroyed by the barbarians would not be rebuilt but left as memorials of their impiety. In 449 bce, however, peace with Persia was at last officially established, and the oath was annulled. Athens, moreover, had ample funds, for the silver mines in the Laurium (Lavrion) Hills of southern Attica were in full production. These mines had always been exploited, but in 483 bce a big strike was made, the proceeds of which were used to build the ships that won the Battle of Salamis in 480 bce. Thereafter, the mines remained productive throughout the 5th and 4th centuries, providing Athens with the sinews of its strength in the great Classical age. Another source of revenue was the tribute that the allies had been paying, as members of the Delian League, to prosecute the war against Persia. Athens had been collecting and administering this money and, even though the war was officially over, continued to collect it in spite of the protests of the allies, who degenerated into subjects of Athens. Pericles deemed it proper, over the protests of his opponents, to use this money on beautifying the city; in this way he could keep the money in circulation and provide jobs for the whole population. Thus began one of the largest and most enduring works programs in history.

History of Athens, Athens at its zenith: In a period of 40 years the Acropolis was entirely rebuilt in gleaming white marble quarried from Mount Pentelicus, 10 miles north of the city. The first great work was the Parthenon, begun in 447 bce and finished, except for some details, in 438 bce. The architects were Ictinus and Callicrates, and Phidias was in charge of the whole artistic program. The building was considerably larger than was usual, having eight columns across the ends and 17 on the long sides, against six by 13 for the average temple. It was richly decorated with sculpture, having a running frieze all around the top of the cella (the walled-in chamber within the colonnade) wall outside, and sculptured metopes and sculptured pediments. Inside the cella stood the cult statue, the great gold and ivory figure of Athena, the work of Phidias. No sooner was the main work on the Parthenon completed than the Propylaea was begun. This was the monumental gateway, with five doors at the head of the approach, designed by the architect Mnesicles. Its large outer vestibule was covered by a marble ceiling, supported by marble beams with a free span of 18 feet, about which Pausanias wrote, “The Propylaea has a ceiling of white marble which in the beauty and size of the stones remains supreme even to my time.” Work on the Propylaea was nearly finished when it was stopped by the outbreak of the Peloponnesian War in 432 bce, but, as things began to go well for Athens, the little temple of Athena Nike was erected on the bastion in front of the Propylaea, perhaps in 425 bce. Around the time of the Peace of Nicias (421 bce), the Erechtheum was begun. This was a small Ionic temple, of highly irregular plan, which housed various early cults and sacred tokens. When the building was about half-finished, work was suddenly interrupted, probably because of the disastrous Athenian expedition to Sicily (415–413 bce), but it was resumed in 409, and the building was completed in 406. The final defeat of Athens two years later put an end to all building, but the Acropolis had been completed, and in later centuries only secondary buildings and monuments were added.

History of Athens, Athens at its zenith: In the second half of the 5th century there was also some building activity in the lower town. Even before the Parthenon, work was begun on the temple of Hephaestus (the god of fire), the Theseum, which still stands on a low hill. In the Agora itself, a new Bouleuterion was built, and two colonnades, the Stoa of Zeus and the South Stoa, were constructed. On the south slope of the Acropolis, next to the theatre, Pericles built an odeum, a large enclosed concert hall, its roof supported by a forest of columns. Of the theatre itself there are no identifiable remains, but the arrangements were no doubt quite simple, and it is known that a theatre existed on this spot from the late 6th century bce because of the old temple of Dionysus (the god of wine) nearby, which dates from the same period. A sanctuary of Asclepius was founded on the south slope of the Acropolis in 420 bce.

History of Athens, Athens at its zenith: Athens was slow in recovering from its defeat in the Peloponnesian War, but in 394 bce its admiral, Conon, won a decisive naval victory over Sparta off Cnidus, on the west coast of Asia Minor. As a result, he rebuilt the Long Walls, which the Spartans had demolished to the music of flutes 10 years before, believing they were inaugurating the freedom of Greece. The walls of Piraeus were also rebuilt, and those of the city were repeatedly strengthened in the course of the 4th century, notably by the addition of a ditch, or moat, as protection against siege machinery.

History of Athens, Athens at its zenith: Apart from military works, there was little building in 4th-century Athens until the years 338–322 bce, when the orator Lycurgus was in control of the state finances and there was great activity. On the Pnyx, the broad-backed hill west of the Acropolis where the Athenian popular assembly had met since the reforms of Cleisthenes in the 6th century, a large auditorium was constructed. At the same time, two large stoas were started on the terrace above. The Theatre of Dionysus was rebuilt and greatly enlarged and furnished with stone seats to accommodate the crowds. (Lycurgus did another service to the theatre by having definitive copies made of the old plays.) The Panathenaic stadium was also built about then, partly with state funds and partly by private contributions; the land was donated by a certain Deinias, and one Eudemus of Plataea provided 1,000 yoke of draft animals to level the ground. The period was one of lavish private expenditure in other fields as well. The tripods won in choral contests were displayed on elaborate monuments, sometimes even resembling small temples; the best preserved of these is that of Lysicrates (334 bce), a small round building with six Corinthian columns. Tombs also became increasingly elaborate, often portraying the whole family in high relief. In 315 bce a stop was put to all this extravagance by the sumptuary laws of Demetrius of Phalerum.

History of Athens, Athens at its zenith: Meanwhile, the philosophy schools flourished. Plato (c. 428–348/347 bce) established himself in the Academy, a gymnasium that had existed since at least the 6th century bce in the great olive grove about a mile west of the city. Plato himself had a house and garden nearby. Aristotle and his Peripatetics occupied the Lyceum, another gymnasium, just outside the city to the east, and his successor Theophrastus lived nearby. Antisthenes and the Cynics used the Cynosarges gymnasium to the southeast of the city. Zeno held forth in the heart of the city, in the Stoa Poikile, in the Agora, and his followers were therefore known as Stoics. Epicurus and his followers had a house and garden in town.

History of Athens, Athens at its zenith: Apart from its temples and public buildings and its great avenues, however, Athens seems to have made a poor impression. A 3rd-century-bce visitor complained that the city was dry and ill-supplied with water, that it was badly laid out because of its great antiquity, and that most of the houses were mean. The streets were in fact narrow and winding, and the houses, it is true, presented a blank wall to the street except for the entrance door, but then they were built around a central courtyard, off which the various rooms opened. There was often an upper story, and the court had a well. Water brought in by the aqueducts was not considered good because it was hard (containing salts of magnesium or calcium) and caused rheumatism. Waste water was carried off in an elaborate system of underground drains beneath the streets.

History of Athens, Hellenistic and Roman times: Athens in Hellenistic and Roman times depended for its embellishment less on its own resources than on the generosity of foreign princes. One of the Ptolemies (rulers of Egypt) gave a gymnasium, erected near the sanctuary of Theseus, and the Ptolemies were probably also instrumental in the founding of the sanctuary of the Egyptian gods Isis and Serapis. More important were the donations of the Attalids of Pergamum (a dynasty of Asia Minor). Eumenes II (197–159 bce) gave a large two-story colonnade on the south slope of the Acropolis near the theatre. His brother Attalus II (159–138 bce), who had studied at Athens under the philosopher Carneades, head of the New Academy, likewise gave a colonnade. This was a large, elaborate, two-story building more than 350 feet long with a row of shops at the rear. It was located on the eastern side of the Agora and has been reconstructed in modern times (1953–56) to serve as the museum of the Agora excavations. The Stoa of Attalus was the first element in a large-scale reconstruction of the Agora. It was followed in quick succession by three buildings, the Middle Stoa, the East Building, and the South Stoa, which together formed a separate South Square.

History of Athens, Hellenistic and Roman times: The capture of Athens by the Roman general Sulla in 86 bce was accompanied by great slaughter and much destruction of private houses, but the only public building to be destroyed was the Odeum of Pericles, burned by the defenders lest its timbers be used by the enemy. The Odeum was rebuilt a few years later through the generosity of King Ariobarzanes of Cappadocia.

History of Athens, Hellenistic and Roman times: Under the Roman Empire, Athens enjoyed imperial favour. A spacious market for the sale of oil and other commodities was laid out east of the old Agora with funds originally provided by Julius Caesar and supplemented by the emperor Augustus. In the old Agora itself, a new odeum, or concert hall, was built in the middle of the square by Marcus Agrippa, the emperor’s son-in-law and one of his chief lieutenants. A large building, perhaps a lawcourt, was also erected at the northeast corner. At the southeast corner of the Agora, a handsome library was erected about 100 ce, the gift of one T. Flavius Pantainus and his family. It was decorated with a group of marble sculptures representing Homer flanked by the Iliad and the Odyssey. On the Acropolis a small round temple was erected to the goddess Roma and the emperor Augustus.

History of Athens, Hellenistic and Roman times: The emperor Hadrian (117–138 ce) completed the great temple of Olympian Zeus, started more than 600 years earlier by the Peisistratids. This temple formed the chief ornament of the new eastern suburb of Athens, and Hadrian gave the area a monumental entrance through a gateway, the inscriptions on which proclaimed, on one side, “This is the Athens of Theseus, the old city” and, on the other, “This is the city of Hadrian, not of Theseus.” Hadrian also built a library, a gymnasium, and a pantheon (a sanctuary of all the gods). His aqueduct, which brought water from the mountains to the north, has been reconditioned and still serves the modern city.

History of Athens, Hellenistic and Roman times: In the reign of Valerian (253–260 ce), the walls of Athens, which had been neglected since Sulla’s capture of the city in 86 bce and had fallen into ruin, were rebuilt, and the circuit was extended to include the new suburb northeast of the Olympieion. This was done because of the threat of a barbarian invasion, but when that invasion came, in 267 ce, the walls were of no avail. The Heruli, a Germanic people from northern Europe, easily captured Athens, and, though the historian P. Herennius Dexippus rallied 2,000 men on the city outskirts, they could only resort to guerrilla tactics. The lower town was sacked, and all the buildings of the Agora were burned and destroyed. The Acropolis, however, may have held out; at least there is no evidence of extensive damage at this time.

History of Athens, Hellenistic and Roman times: This sack of Athens is comparable only to that by the Persians in 480 bce, but now the reaction was quite different. The Athenians abandoned the outer circuit and established a new and much smaller line north of the Acropolis, leaving even the Agora area outside the walls. This new wall, which, on the evidence of coins, was built in the reign of Probus (276–282 ce), consisted of material taken from ruined buildings in the lower town.

History of Athens, Hellenistic and Roman times: Athens remained confined within this narrow circuit for several generations, but in the 4th and 5th centuries it experienced a revival. The old outer circuit of the walls was restored, and many new buildings were erected. Athens at this time was still the cultural capital of the Greek world and a stronghold of paganism. Its schools of philosophy, which retained their ancient names, however different their outlooks may have been, flourished, attracting students from all parts. These included the emperor Julian the Apostate and two Fathers of the Church, Basil and Gregory of Nazianzus. While the schools existed, Athens remained a place of consequence, but, when they were closed by the emperor Justinian in 529 ce, Athens sank to the level of a small provincial town. Power and wealth had long since moved to Constantinople, the new centre of the Greek world.

History of Athens, The Byzantine and Turkish periods: Christianity started early in Athens, with the visit of the Apostle Paul in 51 ce and the conversion of Dionysius the Areopagite, a former archon and member of the Court of the Areopagus that had heard Paul’s defense of his teachings. The little Christian community did not flourish, however, and Athens remained a stronghold of older ways. In the 5th and 6th centuries, however, after the formal establishment of Christianity and the abolition of pagan worship, churches began to be built. These were sometimes ancient temples converted to Christian worship—for example, the Parthenon, the Erechtheum, and the temple of Hephaestus (the Theseum). Newly built churches had a basilica plan and a wooden roof, but these now survive only in foundations. In all, some 22 churches of this period are known.

History of Athens, The Byzantine and Turkish periods: The 7th–10th century was a dark time for Athens. The city is almost never mentioned in the history of the period, and archaeological remains are few. In the 11th and 12th centuries a measure of prosperity returned, and the taste of Athenians then can be gauged by the number of small stone and brick churches surviving, built on the Byzantine cross-in-square plan, such as the Kapnikaréa and those of St. Theodore and the Holy Apostles.

History of Athens, The Byzantine and Turkish periods: Athens fell to the Crusaders in 1204 and remained in Latin hands for 250 years. The town’s outward appearance changed little, except that the Parthenon—now a Roman Catholic, not an Orthodox, cathedral—received a bell tower.

History of Athens, The Byzantine and Turkish periods: After the siege of Athens by the Turks in 1456–58, the Parthenon became a mosque (1460), and its bell tower was turned into a minaret. Other mosques were built in the lower town, but in general the age of gunpowder was to prove disastrous for Athenian architecture, especially on the Acropolis, which was still virtually intact as late as the mid-17th century.

History of Athens, Athens after Greek independence: Greek insurgents surprised the city in 1821 and captured the Acropolis in 1822, but in 1826 Athens again fell into the hands of the Turks, who bombarded and took the Acropolis in the following year (the Erechtheum suffered greatly, and the monument of Thrasyllus was destroyed). The Turks remained in possession of the Acropolis until 1833, when Athens was chosen as the capital of the new kingdom of Greece. Its subsequent history is that of the kingdom.

History of Athens, Athens after Greek independence: In World War I, Athens was the scene of the incidents of 1916–17 that led to the deposition of King Constantine by the Allies. It was occupied by German troops during World War II, but the city was spared aerial bombardment.

History of Athens, Athens after Greek independence: In the second half of the 20th century, the population of the Athens metropolitan area swelled, though the growth was concentrated in suburban and exurban communities. By the 1980s Athens had become known for having some of the worst traffic congestion and concomitant air pollution of any European city. The failure of public transportation to alleviate these problems was one of the reasons cited for the failure of Athens’s bid to host the 1996 Olympic Games. In securing the hosting of the 2004 Games, Athens undertook a massive transportation infrastructure improvement effort. Some observers doubted that the city would be able to complete its transportation upgrade and civic improvements in time for the Games, but a new international airport was opened in 2001, the metropolitan transit system was expanded, a new tram system was up and running, and the cement was dry on the new sports venues before the opening ceremony. Athens also met the challenge of providing shelter and sustenance for the migrants and refugees displaced by turmoil in Africa and the Middle East in the mid-2010s.

History of Athens, Athens after Greek independence: Although Greece’s national sport is football (soccer), basketball has rapidly increased in popularity, especially after Athens-born Giannis Antetokounmpo became one of the most dominant basketball players in the world and led the Milwaukee Bucks of the NBA to a championship in 2021.