Montreal, city, Quebec province, southeastern Canada. Montreal is the second most-populous city in Canada and the principal metropolis of the province of Quebec. The city of Montreal occupies about three-fourths of Montreal Island (Île de Montréal), the largest of the 234 islands of the Hochelaga Archipelago, one of three archipelagoes near the confluence of the Ottawa and St. Lawrence rivers. Area 141 square miles (365 square km); metro. area, 1,644 square miles (4,259 square km). Pop. (2011) 1,649,519; metro. area, 3,934,078; (2021) 1,762,949; metro. area, 4,342,213.

Character of the city (Montreal). Montreal is a city with considerable French colonial history dating back to the 16th century. It began as a missionary settlement but soon became a fur-trading centre, a role that was enhanced after the conquest of New France by the British in 1763. Montreal’s location on the St. Lawrence proved to be a major advantage in its development as a transportation, manufacturing, and financial centre. From the time of the confederation of Canada (1867), Montreal was the largest metropolitan centre in the country until it was overtaken by Toronto in the 1970s. French Canadians are the majority population in Montreal, which is often said to be the second largest French-speaking city in the world (after Paris), though the accuracy of that statement is sometimes questioned (principally by those who make the same claim for Kinshasa and Algiers). Montreal’s economy, however, was long dominated by an Anglophone minority. The city has been a destination for many immigrants and is widely considered to be one of North America’s most cosmopolitan cities. Montreal remains a city of great charm, vivacity, and gaiety, as well as one of unquestioned modernity.

Character of the city (Montreal). Just walking the streets of Montreal is an experience, especially the historic centre known as Old Montreal (Vieux-Montréal), which provides a window into the city’s rich history with its cobblestone streets and architectural styles ranging from the 16th century to the present.

City site (Montreal). At the end of the last ice age, some 11,700 years ago, the lower St. Lawrence was a large sea (Champlain Sea) that eventually drained, leaving the fertile sedimentary St. Lawrence River valley, which is shaped like a funnel—narrow at the Quebec city end and considerably wider upriver at Montreal. Those physical conditions eventually translated into a settlement pattern with more farms and people in and around Montreal than around Quebec city. Moreover, Montreal’s location farther south and in closer proximity to the modifying effects of the Great Lakes than Quebec city gave the region’s farmers a distinct advantage in increased frost-free days over those who lived downriver. 

City site (Montreal). The St. Lawrence River, draining the Great Lakes, provided a natural waterway and transportation corridor to the heart of the North American continent. From the 1600s to the early 1800s, rivers and lakes acted as highways for the lucrative fur trade, and Montreal became an ideal entrepôt site to facilitate that trade. Its location at the confluence of the St. Lawrence and Ottawa rivers made it an important staging centre for a fur trade to the west and north as far as the Hudson Bay. While the Lachine Rapids on the St. Lawrence (just west of the city) prohibited some larger vessels from continuing upriver, fur traders were nevertheless able to follow the river to the Great Lakes and, via Lake Michigan, on to the largest river system in North America—the Mississippi-Missouri rivers. Long after the fur trade had ended, technologies that improved water-based travel, such as dredging and canals, only enhanced Montreal’s status as a transportation centre. (The Lachine Canal National Historic Site preserves the path of the ship canal at the southern end of Montreal Island that was used to bypass the rapids until the seaway was constructed.) 

City site (Montreal). The need for defense was a major influence in siting Montreal (Ville-Marie) on Montreal Island, near the confluence of the Ottawa and St. Lawrence rivers. The city is built around and up Mont Royal (Mount Royal), which rises to 763 feet (233 metres).

Climate (Montreal). Montreal has a continental climate, but its proximity to the Great Lakes, in combination with prevailing westerly winds, modifies temperatures for both winter and summer. The average temperature for January is in the mid-teens F (about –9 °C), but the windchill factor can decrease that temperature considerably. The average July temperature is in the low 70s F (about 22 °C); however, it is not unusual to have summer days in which the temperature exceeds the mid-80s F (about 30 °C) and humidity is 100 percent. The prevailing winds and Great Lakes also influence precipitation, which is relatively even year-round amounting to approximately 41 inches (1,050 mm) annually. In winter, though, that precipitation is mainly in the form of snow, and totals often exceed 7 feet (about 2.2 metres); a major hazard for the region is freezing rain in the winter. A memorable ice storm in 1998 took a number of lives, made travel on roads impossible, and caused major damage to hydroelectric transmission lines and trees.

City layout (Montreal). The rapid economic growth of Montreal following World War II was accompanied by administrators intent upon grand designs. One component of the grand design was a successful bid to host the 1967 World’s Fair in commemoration of the 100th anniversary of Canadian Confederation. Expo 67 (Man and His World) involved massive construction and was located on two islands in the St. Lawrence—the existing Île Sainte-Hélène and the nearby, entirely man-made Île Notre-Dame. 

City layout (Montreal). Another significant change to the cityscape was Place Ville-Marie (1962), which comprises a cruciform building more than 40 stories tall and many underground shops, restaurants, and theatres, linked to which are nearby skyscrapers with similar underground complexes. Together they form a downtown area that provides the metropolis with an underground commercial, culinary, and artistic answer to New York City’s Rockefeller Center. While the Place Ville-Marie remained an important landmark, taller buildings were constructed at the end of the 1990s. In 1992 the skyscraper commonly referred to by its address, the 1000 de la Gauchetière, became the tallest building in the city (without antenna) at 617 feet (188 metres). The 1250 René-Levesque Ouest (originally named the IBM-Marathon building) was also completed in 1992 and ranks second in terms of rooftop height, but its antenna reaches to 756 feet (230 metres). 

City layout (Montreal). While visitors often note the European flavour of Montreal, downtown Montreal is definitely North American in style. In the summer months the area called the Quartiers des Spectacles hosts several of Montreal’s best-known festivals, including the Just for Laughs Festival, the International Jazz Festival, and the Francofolies (dedicated to Francophone music).

City layout (Montreal). Montreal’s neighbourhoods have a distinct character and appeal. Since the 1980s formerly working-class neighbourhoods such as the Plateau Mont-Royal—which is east of Mont Royal and north of the city’s central core—have developed into trendy areas. At the center of “the Plateau,” the 400,000-square-metre (40-hectare) Lafontaine Park offers a bucolic setting with large trees, two ponds, an open-air theatre, and bike paths. Southeast of the Plateau is another of Montreal’s distinctive neighbourhoods, the Latin Quarter, where students have congregated since the 18th century. Adjacent to the Latin Quarter is the Village, or Gay Village, the focus of Montreal’s gay community. 

City layout (Montreal). Characteristic of the architecture of many of Montreal’s residential neighbourhoods is the prevalence of three-story town houses, which are typically divided into three or five apartments accessed by distinctive curving or spiral exterior staircases. Montreal’s residents benefit from four large farmers’ markets. Particularly popular is the Jean-Talon market, which hosts hundreds of vendors in summer months. Offering an abundance of haute-cuisine restaurants and art galleries, Old Montreal is popular with tourists and locals alike.

City layout (Montreal). Some of the city’s most-affluent areas are located near Mont Royal. On its flank are found many of the largest mansions of the administratively separate community of Westmont, which consistently ranks among Canada’s wealthiest towns. Northwest of Mont Royal is Outremont, which merged with Montreal City in 2001 and has long been home to the Francophone elite. At the beginning of the 21st century, Outremont was also home to the second largest Hasidic Jewish community in North America (after the one in New York City).

City layout (Montreal). Mark Twain once described Montreal as “a city where you couldn’t throw a brick without breaking a church window.” Indeed, Quebec’s Roman Catholic heritage is reflected in the city’s countless churches. In what was once Montreal’s commercial centre, the Place d’Armes, stands the magnificent Neo-Gothic Notre-Dame Basilica (founded in 1683 and rebuilt in 1829). Also noteworthy is the monumental St. Joseph’s Oratory, situated on Mont Royal, near the University of Montreal. The renaissance-style oratory is easily recognizable with its large white dome surmounted by a cross that marks the highest point in Montreal (856 feet [260 metres] above sea level). It is a common ritual for pious pilgrims to climb its 99 front stairs on their knees.

People of Montreal. Under the French regime, Montreal became one of New France’s favoured destinations. In the 1760s, however, the city’s dominant French Canadian Catholic population began to see an influx of English-speaking Protestants, initially following the signing of the Treaty of Paris in 1763, which officially ceded New France to Great Britain, and then as a result of the American Revolution, when loyalists migrated into the region. Indeed, from the early 1830s to the mid-1860s, those of British origin constituted the majority of Montreal’s inhabitants. The growth of Montreal as a manufacturing centre required plenty of labour; in answer, some came from Europe, but most of those who sought work were French Canadians, which eventually led to conflict. The owners and controllers of the Montreal economy were, for the most part, Anglophones; French Canadians, the dominant population from the mid-1860s, worked in the factories. That divide at the workplace was mirrored in a spatial pattern that developed whereby Boulevard Saint-Laurent (St. Lawrence Street) became a linguistic partition, with Francophones living to the east of it and English speakers to the west. 

People of Montreal. The economic boom following World War II attracted immigrants from Europe, Asia, Africa, and elsewhere in the Americas, transforming Montreal into a diverse multicultural city. Despite that increase in immigrant population, French speakers make up about half of the population in the city proper and some two-thirds of the population on the island. Religious affiliations in Montreal generally follow ethnic traditions. Roman Catholicism is by far the dominant faith, although active religious practice among Roman Catholics has dramatically diminished since the mid-20th century.

Manufacturing (Montreal). Transportation improvements were vital in attracting manufacturing industries to Montreal. With canal construction and advancements, oceangoing vessels were able to reach the city, and, with rail developments, by the 1880s Montreal had become a hub for transcontinental and international movement of goods. As a consequence, manufacturing industries lined the Lachine Canal, producing cotton goods, clothing, textiles, shoes, food, and beverages as well as ships, metal goods, and petroleum products. By the mid-20th century the general shift from rail to road transportation of goods was matched by the flight of many industries away from Montreal to suburbs. 

Manufacturing (Montreal). Beginning in the 1970s, globalization further challenged the economic viability of some of Montreal’s manufacturers, and many of the city’s labour-intensive industries—clothing, textiles, and shoes—lost out to international competition. The restructuring of industry resulted in the loss of manufacturing jobs, but, over time, new (often high-tech) industries emerged. The aerospace industry is a major employer in Quebec province, and Montreal is home to the headquarters for the International Air Transportation Association (IATA), the International Business Aviation Council, and the International Civil Aviation Organization. Research and development for transportation in general is another significant component of Montreal’s economy. Other industries include food processing, beverage making, engineering, software development, and the manufacture of telecommunications equipment and pharmaceuticals, along with printing and publishing. Owned and operated by the provincial government of Quebec, Hydro Québec gives Montreal a major role in the electrical power generation industry.

Manufacturing (Montreal). In response to the political upheaval that resulted from Quebec’s independence movement from the 1970s to the 1990s, thousands of Anglophone Montrealers moved to Ontario, taking corporations such as Sun Life Assurance with them. Indeed, the operational headquarters of the Bank of Montreal relocated in Toronto, thus assisting the latter city in becoming the financial capital of Canada. Moreover, the completion in 2008 of the merger of the Montreal and Toronto stock exchanges further reinforced Toronto’s dominance of the financial realm.

Transportation (Montreal). The series of rapids on the St. Lawrence River west of Montreal long served as a barrier to oceangoing vessels accessing the Great Lakes. However, that impediment was overcome in 1959 with the opening of the St. Lawrence Seaway, a joint venture of the U.S. and Canadian governments. The seaway, along with the introduction of icebreakers in winter, not only provided much-greater access to the centre of the North American continent but also benefited other Quebec port cities, such as Baie Comeau and Quebec city, as ships could now bypass Montreal in the transatlantic trade. In response, Montreal invested in container facilities and became a leader in that vital shipping service. 

Transportation (Montreal). The 1950s also saw the proliferation of automobiles and freeways, and in 1960 the Metropolitan Boulevard, an east-west throughway that spanned the island, was opened. In the early 21st century Montreal was afflicted by considerable traffic congestion that may have been at least partly a long-term consequence of a cost-driven moratorium on freeway construction from 1977 to 1985. Montreal is still a railway centre, and, while much of the rail traffic is dedicated to moving goods, there is also regular passenger service to other cities such as Toronto and the Ottawa-Gatineau area. Montreal is served by two international airports (both under the same authority): Montreal–Pierre Elliot Trudeau (formerly Montréal-Dorval) handles domestic and international commercial flights, and Montreal-Mirabel handles air cargo.

Transportation (Montreal). Public transportation in Montreal dates from the intermittent use of horse-drawn omnibuses perhaps as early as the late 1840s. During the winter in the 1860s, sleighs replaced the railcar service that was inaugurated in 1861. By 1894 the entire system had been electrified and the last horsecars withdrawn from service. Tramway service on rail lines expanded to meet the needs of the city’s growing population, but the introduction of buses in 1919 resulted in the beginning of the end for tramways by the mid-1930s, although the last public streetcar line lasted until 1959. Electric trolley buses were used from 1937 to 1966. Being awarded Expo 67 contributed to the development of Montreal’s subway system (referred to as the Metro), on which construction began in 1962 under the supervision of engineers from the Paris Métro. The system was inaugurated six months before the opening of Expo 67. The Montreal Metro’s cars travel on rubber tires that make for a quieter ride but require the system to run entirely underground because of the detrimental effect that the city’s harsh winters would have on the tires. Each Metro station has a different architectural design and artistic decor. 

Transportation (Montreal). Underneath the city, some 387 million square feet (36 million square metres) of pedestrian walkways, malls, and shops offer protection from the winter cold and snow. Directly connected to the subway system, the elaborate underground network ranks as the largest of its kind in the world. Aboveground, for three seasons of the year, the public bicycle share system, BIXI (an amalgam of the words bicycle and taxi), allows riders to rent a bike and drop it off at a docking station near their destination.

Government (Montreal). As the population expanded, many independent cities and villages were established adjacent to the city of Montreal (first incorporated in 1832) on other islands, as well as on both shores of the St. Lawrence. One of the dynamics of that population growth was the annexation of many of those villages and cities, beginning in 1883 with the city of Hochelaga. More than two dozen others were added by 1968. In 2002 the remaining separate municipalities on Montreal Island merged into Montreal City as districts of the city. However, a number of those new districts objected to the arrangement, and in 2005 most of the former municipalities were permitted to vote for or against continued affiliation with Montreal. Ultimately, 15 communities chose to deamalgamate and became separate municipalities again in 2006. 

Government (Montreal). The organization of local government has embraced many models over the years, with changes resulting from population increases, from new demands placed on local government, and by provincial government decree. For example, Montreal was in financial trouble as a result of the Great Depression of the 1930s, and the provincial government established a new structure in 1940 wherein 99 councillors were elected by individuals who fell into three categories: (1) property owners, (2) all householders, and (3) members of various public organizations (e.g., universities, unions, chambers of commerce). Each class had 33 councillors, and the city was divided into 11 electoral districts. The class system was phased out by 1962, and the number of districts was increased to 15. A Montreal Urban Community replaced the Montreal Metropolitan Corporation in 1969. Its responsibilities, for the whole of Montreal Island and Bizard Island to the north, included assessment and tax collection, traffic control, water and sewage services, police and fire protection, and antipollution activities. It was governed by a general council and an executive committee. In 1978 an urban governance system was created under which councillors were elected from 54 electoral areas in the city. 

Government (Montreal). The present model emerged through the 2002 annexation of all independent municipalities on the island of Montreal, the dissolving of the Montreal Urban Community, and then the election of a new provincial government under which the annexation of 15 municipalities was reversed through referendum (2004). Today Montreal has a two-tier government system composed of the City of Montreal and its 19 boroughs. Each borough has its own council and sends one or more councillors (depending on population) to represent the borough on the 65-member City Council, headed by the mayor. Since 2006 the larger entity of the island of Montreal (including the 15 municipalities that chose not to remain incorporated in the city) has been governed by an agglomeration council, which establishes priorities for a range of services from public transit to waste management. Moreover, on the regional level, a still-broader institution, the Montreal Metropolitan Community (formed in 2001), serves 82 municipalities, encompassing an area of nearly 1,700 square miles (4,360 square km) and some four million residents.

Health (Montreal). The comprehensive Quebec health care system issues a health card to all residents that covers the cost of treatment of a wide range of health issues. In Montreal and most of the rest of the province, 24 hours per day and 7 days per week, the Info-Santé hotline is answered by a health care professional who provides advice and referrals to a doctor at a neighbourhood walk-in clinic or a hospital with an emergency department.

Education (Montreal). As throughout Quebec, there is a public school system that supports both French- and English-speaking schools. The majority of those institutions are French-speaking, reflecting the majority Francophone population. There are also a range of private schools. 

Education (Montreal). Montreal is probably the outstanding city of Canada in terms of higher education. McGill University (founded 1821) and Concordia University (1974; formed by the merger of Sir George Williams University, founded in 1929, and Loyola College, founded in 1899) offer mainly English-language instruction, whereas the University of Montreal (1876) and the University of Quebec at Montreal (1968) serve the French-speaking population.

Cultural life (Montreal). With its Place des Arts, museums, public libraries, art galleries, bookshops in most European languages, symphony orchestra, publishing houses, theatre companies, and free public lectures at the universities, Montreal must be accounted as a major cultural centre. 

Cultural life (Montreal). The Place des Arts is a complex of concert and theatre halls in downtown Montreal. Adjacent to it is the Museum of Contemporary Art, which was founded in 1964 and moved to its present location in 1992. Also nearby is the Complexe Desjardins, an exciting example of modern architecture; the complex, with its multilevel terraces, balconies, mezzanines, and sunken plaza, comprises three office towers, a public square, a hotel, and several restaurants and retail stores. Art instruction is given, among other places, at the Museum of Fine Arts. Besides a conservatory of music, faculties or schools of music offer instruction at the universities. Other significant museums include the Montréal Museum of Archaeology and History (Pointe-à-Callière) and the McCord Museum of Canadian History. 

Cultural life (Montreal). In the 1930s only a few bookshops existed, but today bookshops can be found in all districts and shopping centres, and “new Canadians,” as new immigrants are called, can buy books, reviews, and magazines in their native languages. The Municipal Library has several branches, and special libraries are located throughout the city. In 2005 the Quebec government inaugurated the Grande Bibliothèque, a public library holding more than four million volumes. Publishing houses, both English and French, prosper. 

Cultural life (Montreal). Montrealers are great sports enthusiasts. First and foremost in their hearts is ice hockey, and the Montreal Canadiens is one of the most-storied franchises in the National Hockey League. Other indoor and outdoor sports have many adherents. The city has a professional Canadian gridiron football team, the Alouettes. Major League Baseball was played in Montreal from 1969 to 2005 by the Expos, who moved to Washington, D.C., and became the Nationals. 

Cultural life (Montreal). In winter the slopes of Mont Royal are covered with skiers. The Montreal Olympic Park, site of the 1976 Summer Games, has a sports stadium (Big O) seating more than 70,000 spectators; Montreal Tower, an inclined structure 540 feet (165 metres) tall with three observation floors that are accessible via cable car; Montreal Biodome, in which four separate ecosystems have been re-created; and a sports and fitness complex containing six swimming pools. Adjacent to the park is the Montreal Botanical Garden, with more than 20,000 plant species and an insectarium.

History of Montreal. Early settlement. The site of Montreal was called Hochelaga by the Huron people when the French navigator and explorer Jacques Cartier visited it in 1535–36 on his second voyage to the New World. More than 1,000 Native Americans (some sources say as many as 3,500) welcomed him on the slope of the mountain that he named Mont Royal (Mont Réal). More than 50 years elapsed before other Frenchmen returned, this time with Samuel de Champlain, the founder of Quebec city. The Hurons had disappeared, but Champlain saw the potential of the location as a fur-trade site. He had land cleared and called it Place Royale; however his ambitions never materialized. 

History of Montreal. Early settlement. Montreal’s beginnings were not as a fur-trade fort but rather as a missionary centre, named Ville-Marie by its founder, Paul de Chomedey, sieur (lord) de Maisonneuve, in May 1642. He built dwellings, a chapel, a hospital, and other structures, protecting the settlement against Indian attack with a stockade. Indeed, the community was under constant attack from the Iroquois, who were aligned with the British until a peace treaty (La Grande Paix) was negotiated in 1701. The community was granted its first civic charter by King Louis XIV in 1644, and Chomedey became its first governor. The first hospital, the Hôtel-Dieu, was founded in 1644 by Jeanne Mance and the first school for girls in 1653 by Marguerite Bourgeoys. Almost immediately, a society of priests, Les Messieurs de Saint-Sulpice, took charge of education for boys. 

History of Montreal. Early settlement. Although Montreal began as a missionary settlement, its importance as a fur-trade centre soon surpassed that of Quebec city, because its location allowed movement via the St. Lawrence River to the Great Lakes and south to the Gulf of Mexico, whereas the Ottawa River watershed facilitated movement west and north. The region encompassed by those waterways constituted a great interior fur empire—one that France’s rival Britain wanted to control. Being the key transportation centre for the fur trade, however, did not promote rapid population growth. By 1700 fewer than 1,000 people lived in Montreal, but immigration and encouragement to settle through the French seignorial system (under which a landowner leased portions of his holdings to numerous farming families) increased Montreal’s population to some 5,000 by the early 1760s. 

History of Montreal. Early settlement. The decisive battle in the military conflict between Britain and France in North America occurred on the Plains of Abraham, adjacent to Quebec city, in 1759 and was won by the British. In 1760 Montreal surrendered peacefully to British forces and, with all of New France, became part of the British North American empire in 1763. In November 1775 Montreal was occupied by American Revolutionary forces, who retreated in the spring following the abortive siege of Quebec city by Benedict Arnold and thus failed to secure Canada for the new United States. 

History of Montreal. Early settlement. The American Revolution had other consequences for British North America in general and Montreal in particular. English-speaking loyalists flooded into Canada with the promise of homesteads, giving English names (e.g., Sherbrooke) to a French Canadian landscape and, by 1791, creating two separate colonies—Upper Canada (modern-day Ontario) and Lower Canada (modern-day Quebec). Montreal’s position as a fur-trade metropolis improved, but, since the British takeover of New France, Englishmen, Scots, and Americans had been in charge of the trade, with French Canadians employed in the fur brigades. There was a constant (and frequently bitter) rivalry between the Montreal-based North West Company and the Hudson’s Bay Company that ended with the merger of the two companies in 1821. That union ended Montreal’s role in the fur trade, because it was considerably less expensive to ship furs via Hudson Bay. 

History of Montreal. Early settlement. The loss of the fur trade did not impede the city’s growth, however. Montreal’s role as a transportation centre had been shifting from the shipment of furs to that of timber and agricultural produce, and it was becoming a modern city. In 1796 Canada’s first public library was opened in Montreal. The following year daily postal service was established between Montreal and the United States. In 1809 John Molson—entrepreneur, brewer, and banker—linked Montreal and Quebec city by water with the first Canadian steamship. Canada’s first bank, the Bank of Montreal, was founded in 1817, and construction of the Lachine Canal, effectively the forerunner of the St. Lawrence Seaway, was started in 1821. 

History of Montreal. Early settlement. In 1825 Molson provided his city with a splendid theatre, and gas lighting appeared by 1837. A Committee of Trade, forerunner of the Board of Trade (1842), was founded in 1822, and from 1844 to 1849 Montreal served as the capital of Canada. On April 25, 1849, a mob set fire to the Parliament building, possibly as an angry response to the passage of the Rebellion Losses Bill, which sought to compensate those whose property had been damaged in the Rebellions of 1837–38 and which some Anglo Canadians viewed as a demonstration of French Canadian dominance. In 1847 telegraph links were made with Toronto, Quebec city, and New York City; in 1853 a shipping service between Montreal, Liverpool, and the European continent was begun; in 1856 a railroad to Toronto opened; and, with railway construction throughout the 1850s, Montreal became a hub city, with lines south to Portland, Maine, east to Lévis and Rivière-du-Loup, and southwest to Toronto and Sarnia (now Sarnia-Clearwater). Being an international port tied to a radiating network of rail lines proved to be advantageous for the location of industry, and many manufacturing plants were erected that produced flour, sugar, ships, wood products, agricultural products, shoes, clothing, and alcoholic beverages. By the 1861 census, the city’s population exceeded 90,000.

Evolution of the modern city (Montreal). As Canada expanded, Montreal became the headquarters of the two transcontinental railways: the Canadian Pacific Railway, which had reached Port Moody, British Columbia (just outside Vancouver), by 1886, and the Canadian National Railway, which moved its headquarters from Toronto in 1923. By developing many branch lines, those railways opened up new territory for farming, forestry, and mining and, in turn, increased population and the demand for finished goods. Montreal capitalized on all those developments by becoming Canada’s main manufacturing centre, as well as its transportation and financial centres. Montreal had its first electric lighting in 1882, its first electric tramways in 1892, and the first automobiles along its streets and movie houses along its sidewalks in 1903. 

Evolution of the modern city (Montreal). Most of North America experienced prosperity following World War II, and Montreal was no exception. Its manufacturing industries expanded to meet the needs of a growing local, provincial, and national population. The urban centre transformed with the building of Place Ville Marie, installation of the Metro system of public transportation, and the hosting of Expo 67. Being on the international stage did not end with Expo 67. Montreal won the right to host the the 1976 Olympic Games, which, unfortunately, were a financial disaster for the city. The high cost of building and maintaining facilities, including the Olympic Stadium and its 540-foot (165-metre) tower, placed a heavy burden of debt on the province that was not paid off until 2006. 

Evolution of the modern city (Montreal). Montreal played an important role in Quebec’s Quiet Revolution (1960–66), a period of liberal activism and reform that also contributed to a growing sense of Québécois nationalism and an awareness that the province’s Francophone majority population was being held at the lower end of the economic spectrum by a minority Anglophone population that was in control of much of Quebec’s Montreal-dominated economy. The political manifestation of that nationalism was the rise to power in 1976 of the Parti Québécois, which sought political independence for Quebec through provincial referendums in 1980 and 1995. Both referendums failed, though the second by the narrowest of margins, prompting the Canadian Supreme Court to weigh in on the matter. The court ruled in 1998 that if a referendum for separation were to pass, a change to the constitution of Canada would be required and the rest of Canada would have a say in the matter. 

Evolution of the modern city (Montreal). On December 6, 1989, Quebec’s Polytechnique Montréal, a research university, was the site of a mass shooting, then the deadliest in Canadian history until the mass shooting of 2020 in Nova Scotia that left 22 dead. Irrationally blaming his life’s troubles on feminism, shooter Marc Lépine took a semiautomatic rifle to the Montreal campus and killed 14 women (sparing all the men in a classroom) and wounded 13 more people. The incident sparked a lengthy debate about gun control in Canada. 

Evolution of the modern city (Montreal). As the 21st century unfolded, Montreal remained a growing, dynamic city with a diverse economy and a cultural life.